Intro graphql blog (#217)
ippontech/blog-usa: posts/introduction-to-graphql-with-apollo.md

---
authors:
  - Ludovic ROUCOUX
tags:

>   - graphql

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - GraphQL
```

>   - api

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - API
```

>   - apollo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Apollo
```

date: 2022-08-18T17:47:50.000Z
title: "Introduction to GraphQL with Apollo"
image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ippontech/blog-usa/master/images/2022/08/graphql.title.jpg
---

> GraphQL is a modern approach to client-server communication and aims to improve the way developers build web applications. According to its name (QL = Query Language), it is a data query language for API, strongly typed, and also a runtime environment that allows processing these requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GraphQL is a modern approach to client-server communication and aims to improve the way developers build web applications. According to its name (QL = Query Language), it is a data query language for APIs, strongly typed, and a runtime environment that processes these requests.
```

> The first version of this language was designed by Facebook In 2021 and released publicly in 2015. Many specifications were published, up to the last one dating from [October 2021](https://spec.graphql.org/), which includes all its features. [Multiple implementations](https://graphql.org/code/) of this specification are available in several languages, both on the client side and on the server side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first version of this language was designed by Facebook in 2012 and released publicly in 2015. Many specifications were published, up to the last one dating from [October 2021](https://spec.graphql.org/), which includes all of its features. [Multiple implementations](https://graphql.org/code/) of this specification are available in several languages, both on the client and server sides.
```

> Today, GraphQL is mentioned more and more frequently as THE alternative solution to REST. But is this really the ideal solution? What are the main characteristics of the language? In this article, I am going to introduce its core features through Apollo, one of the libraries implementing GraphQL. But first let us take a closer look at the difference between the way REST and GraphQL works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, GraphQL is mentioned more and more frequently as **_the_** alternative solution to REST. But is this really the ideal solution? What are the main characteristics of the language? In this article, I am going to introduce its core features through Apollo, one of the libraries implementing GraphQL. But first, let us take a closer look at the difference between the way REST and GraphQL works.
```

# Compared to REST

The REST formalism forces the client to bend to the existing server-side endpoints to retrieve the resources it needs, and so often calls multiple endpoints to fetch whole data (or more data than required). With GraphQL, **one call is enough** to do so: the client will make this single call to the GraphQL server, which will be in charge of retrieving all requested resources.

![rest-vs-graphql](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ippontech/blog-usa/master/images/2022/08/graphql.rest-vs-graphql.png)

> Thanks to GraphQL, **you will be able to get many resources with only one request** (composite pattern), these resources can be stored in different ways (API, database, file, etc.). This prevents **over fetching** (seeking too much data) and **under fetching** (seeking less than enough data). For this reason, calls between the client and the server are faster and lighter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to GraphQL, **you will be able to get many resources with only one request** (composite pattern), these resources can be stored in different ways (API, database, file, etc.). This prevents **over-fetching** (seeking too much data) and **under-fetching** (seeking less than enough data). For this reason, calls between the client and the server are faster and lighter.
```

> Furthermore, GraphQL may also be used to implement other design patterns. For instance, we can **simplify the use of a complex API** by adding a GraphQL bloc between the client and this API (facade pattern). Similarly, it is possible to include a GraphQL layer **to enrich an old API with a new feature**, for example an authentication layer (proxy pattern).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, GraphQL may also be used to implement other design patterns. For instance, we can **simplify the use of a complex API** by adding a GraphQL bloc between the client and this API (facade pattern). Similarly, it is possible to include a GraphQL layer **to enrich an old API with a new feature**, for example, an authentication layer (proxy pattern).
```

![proxy_and_facade_pattern](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ippontech/blog-usa/master/images/2022/08/graphql.proxy_and_facade_pattern.png)

Here’s what a request and a response from the GraphQL server actually looks like:

![request_response_example](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ippontech/blog-usa/master/images/2022/08/graphql.request_response_example.png)

Every GraphQL response is a JSON map and represents a graph, where the objects are linked together. These links can be represented by the following graph:

![graph](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ippontech/blog-usa/master/images/2022/08/graphql.graph.png)

> Below is a diagram summarizing how GraphQL works with these specific keywords, we will look into it closely in the rest of this article:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is a diagram summarizing how GraphQL works with these specific keywords. We will look into it closely throughout the rest of this article:
```

![structure](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ippontech/blog-usa/master/images/2022/08/graphql.structure.png)

# Interlude

> Before getting any further, it is necessary to have an overview of the data sources on which the following examples will be based. By “data sources”, I mean all data that come from external APIs or databases. I will use a list of books and films that each refer to a person via its identifier (an author for a book, a director for a film). These lists are intended to simulate the response of external APIs (e.g., _media_ API and _people_ API).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before going any further, it is necessary to have an overview of the data sources on which the following examples will be based. By “data sources,” I mean _all_ data that comes from external APIs or databases. I will use a list of books and films that each refer to a person via its identifier (an author for a book, a director for a film, etc.). These lists are intended to simulate the response of external APIs (e.g., _media_ API and _people_ API).
```

```js
const bookData = [
  {
    id: 3,
    title: "Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets",
    author: 300,
    totalPages: 364,
  },
  {
    id: 4,
    title: "Lieutenant Versiga",
    author: 301,
    totalPages: 224,
  },
];

const movieData = [
  {
    id: 100,
    title: "Titanic",
    director: 10,
    runTime: 160,
  },

  {
    id: 101,
    title: "Forrest Gump",
    director: 11,
    runTime: 140,
  },
];

const mediaData = [...bookData, ...movieData];
```

```js
const authors = [
  {
    id: 300,
    firstName: "J. K.",
    lastName: "Rowling",
    dateOfBirth: "1965-07-31T00:00:00.000Z",
    sex: "WOMAN",
  },

  {
    id: 301,
    firstName: "Raphaël",
    lastName: "Malkin",
    dateOfBirth: "1987-03-01T00:00:00.000Z",
    sex: "MAN",
  },
];

const directors = [
  {
    id: 10,
    firstName: "James",
    lastName: "Cameron",
    dateOfBirth: "1954-08-16T00:00:00.000Z",
  },

  {
    id: 11,
    firstName: "Robert",
    lastName: "Zemeckis",
    dateOfBirth: "1951-05-14T00:00:00.000Z",
  },
];

const personData = [...authors, ...directors];
```

# Schema

> Schema is the core feature in GraphQL. The schema defines **a hierarchy of types with fields** that are populated from back-end data sources. This schema also specifies exactly which **queries** and **mutations** are available for clients to execute. Possible structures include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Schema is the core feature in GraphQL. The schema defines **a hierarchy of types with fields** that are populated from back end data sources. This schema also specifies exactly which **queries** and **mutations** are available for clients to execute. Possible structures include:
```

- Scalar type
  - Int
  - Float
  - String
  - Boolean
  - ID (a unique string value, especially for cache management)
- Object (Query, Mutation, Subscription)

> - Input (allows to pass complex objects as parameter of queries or mutations)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Input (enables complex objects to pass as parameter of queries or mutations)
```

- Enum (defines a set of allowed values)

> - Union (represents several return’s types for an object)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Union (represents several return types for an object)
```

- Interface (shares a set of fields between multiples types)

> This is how we can represent our business objects in GraphQL schema in comparison to our data sources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is how we can represent our business objects in a GraphQL schema in comparison to our data sources:
```

```graphql
type Book {
  id: ID!
  title: String!
  totalPages: Int
  author: Person
}

type Person {
  id: ID!
  firstName: String
  lastName: String
  age: Int
  sex: Sex
}

enum Sex {
  MAN
  WOMAN
  OTHER
}
```

> We can apply additional _type modifiers_ to objects in schema providing validation (define a mandatory field) or specifying lists. Let us have a look at all the possible combinations with the String type for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can apply additional _type modifiers_ to objects in schema by providing validation (define a mandatory field) or specifying lists. Let us have a look at all the possible combinations with the String type, for example:
```

- String : string can be null

> - String! : non null string

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- String! : non-null string
```

- [String] : List can be null, containing strings that can be null

> - [String!] : List can be null, containing non null strings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [String!] : List can be null, containing non-null strings
```

> - [String!]! : non null List containing non null strings. An empty string is valid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [String!]! : non-null List containing non null strings. An empty string is valid.
```

These rules will be checked by the GraphQL server and it will trigger a validation error in case of non-compliance.

> Furthermore, GraphQL **has an [introspection](https://graphql.org/learn/introspection/) function**, querying the server to know information about its schema. This allows the client to have a description of all objects present on the server and all possible operations with the associated arguments. It is therefore a kind of automatic documentation that is sent back, which allows the client to easily discover the available features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, GraphQL **has an [introspection](https://graphql.org/learn/introspection/) function**, querying the server to know information about its schema. This allows the client to have a description of all objects present on the server and all possible operations with associated arguments. It is therefore a type of automatic documentation that is sent back, which allows the client to easily discover the available features.
```

# Resolver

**A _resolver_ associates a query or an action to each field of the schema to determine how the data will be processed or retrieved.**

```js
const resolvers = {
  Book: {
    author(parent) {
      return personData.find((a) => a.id === parent.author);
    },
  },

  Person: {
    // Compute the person's age from date of birth
    age(parent) {
      var diff = Date.now() - new Date(parent.dateOfBirth).getTime();
      var age = new Date(diff);
      return Math.abs(age.getUTCFullYear() - 1970);
    },
  },
};
```

In this example, we search for the corresponding `Person` object in the `personData` list using its id to get back the data of an author attached to a book.

> Also, through `age` resolver of the object `Person`, the input data (a birthdate, e.g. `1987-03-01T00:00:00.000Z`) is converted into years to match what we want on output (the person’s age, so 35 years old in this case).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, through `age` resolver of the object `Person`, the input data (a birthdate, e.g. `1987-03-01T00:00:00.000Z`) is converted into years to match what we want as an output (the person’s age, so 35 years old in this case).
```

Note that the other fields of the `Book` (id, title, totalPages) or `Person` (id, firstName, lastName, sex) objects have no resolver. This is not a mistake. **There are indeed default resolvers** that automatically map the datasource with the same name as the field name defined in the schema. For instance, the JSON input returns a `title` field for the `Book` object, and the `Book` object schema has a `title` field, so GraphQL is able to do the mapping on its own. This would be the same as writing the following resolver:

```js
Book: {
  ...
  title(parent) {
    return parent.title
  }
},
```

In addition, _resolvers_ define all possible operations that the server may receive: _query_, _mutation_ and _subscription_.

# Query

A _query_ is used **to fetch values from the GraphQL server**: it is therefore a data reading operation. The _payload_ return is in JSON format and different _queries_ can be executed in parallel. These _queries_ are defined in the schema and processed in the _resolver_.

![query](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ippontech/blog-usa/master/images/2022/08/graphql.query.png)

> GraphQL links the client to the server via the name of the method you aim to call (here, `books` highlighted in yellow). Once the request has been received, the server will check if it exists in the schema under the `Query` type and if it has the correct parameters and return type (here, no parameter but a list of `Book` in output).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GraphQL links the client to the server via the name of the method you aim to call (here, `books` highlighted in yellow). Once the request has been received, the server will check if it exists in the schema under the `Query` type and if it has the correct parameters and return type (here, no parameter, but a list of `Books` in output).
```

> Then, the server searches in the _resolver_ the associate function under the `Query` field (only if the request is valid). Finally, the resolver returns the data and reorders it to match exactly the fields of the query, in the requested order (in our example, the resolver directly returns `bookData`, the book’s list in JSON format).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The server then searches in the _resolver_ for the associate function under the `Query` field, butonly if the request is valid. Finally, the resolver returns the data and reorders it to match exactly the fields of the query in the requested order. In our example, the resolver directly returns `bookData`, the book’s list in JSON format.
```

# Interface

> Interfaces are abstract types **that allow fields to be shared between different objects**. Each object implementing an interface must at least have similar fields, and others if necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interfaces are abstract types **that allow fields to be shared between different objects**. Each object implementing an interface must have at least similar fields, and others if necessary.
```

> Let’s take the previous schema with the `Book` type. We could imagine adding a `Movie` type and a `Media` interface, so `Book` and `Movie` share common fields (`id` and `title`) through the implementation of the `Media` interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s take the previous schema with the `Book` type. We can add a `Movie` type and a `Media` interface, so `Book` and `Movie` share common fields (`id` and `title`) through the implementation of the `Media` interface.
```

```graphql
interface Media {
  id: ID!
  title: String!
}

type Book implements Media {
  id: ID!
  title: String!
  totalPages: Int
  author: Person
}

type Movie implements Media {
  id: ID!
  title: String!
  runTime: Int
  director: Person
}
```

Alternatively, multiple interfaces can be implemented using the following syntax:

```graphql
type MyObject implements Interface1 & Interface2 {
  …
}
```

Now imagine we wanted to fetch all the `Media` objects, by retrieving both common and specific fields of the objects implementing this interface.

How does the server know the difference between a `Book` and a `Movie`?

> Firstly, the _query_ must be declared in the schema and defined in the associate _resolver_ (such as the **books’** _query_). Next, the special function `__resolveType` provided by apollo-server will be included in the resolver of the `Media` object. This function will allow us to define the type of implementation that will be returned according to the fields available in the object: in the case of `author` field is present, then a `Book` will be returned; otherwise, if the object has a `director` field, a `Film` will be returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Firstly, the _query_ must be declared in the schema and defined in the associate _resolver_ (such as the **books’** _query_). Next, the special function `__resolveType` provided by apollo-server will be included in the resolver of the `Media` object. This function will allow us to define the type of implementation that will be returned according to the fields available in the object. In the case of the `author` field being present, then a `Book` will be returned. Otherwise, if the object has a `director` field, a `Film` will be returned.
```

# Fragments

In addition to _inline fragments_, there are fragments that **allow sharing pieces of query in the client-side**. In the previous example, the `author` and `director` objects have the same _id_, _firstName_ and _lastName_ fields. These fields could be gathered in a `PersonFragment` fragment together:

![fragment](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ippontech/blog-usa/master/images/2022/08/graphql.fragment.png)

# Mutation

_Mutations_ **relate to all data changes: add, edit, delete**. In the same way as _queries_, the _mutation_ must be defined in the schema (in the `Mutation` type) and implemented in the associate function of the _resolver_ (in `Mutation` object). It can also return an object, which can be useful to retrieve the state of the object updated by this _mutation_. However, unlike _queries_, _mutations_ are performed in series, one after the other.

A book's addition looks like this:

![mutation_add](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ippontech/blog-usa/master/images/2022/08/graphql.mutation.add.png)

> As in the example, _input_ items can be employed (`BookInput` and `PersonInput`), where each field stands for a parameter, which may be convenient if you want to modify a complex object (instead of modifying fields one by one).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As in the example, _input_ items can be employed (`BookInput` and `PersonInput`), where each field stands for a parameter, which may be convenient if you want to modify a complex object instead of modifying fields one by one.
```

In the same way, this is the process of a book's modification:

![mutation_edit](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ippontech/blog-usa/master/images/2022/08/graphql.mutation.edit.png)

# Subscription

> _Subscriptions_ are the third family of possible operations in GraphQL. Like _query_, _subscriptions_ specify a set of fields to be delivered to the client but, instead of immediately returning an answer, **a result is sent every time an event happens on the server** after the client subscribes to it. Even though they are less common than _queries_ and _mutations_, they can be used to be notified in real time of a change in server-side data, such as the arrival of a new message on a chat application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Subscriptions_ are the third family of possible operations in GraphQL. Like _query_, _subscriptions_ specify a set of fields to be delivered to the client. But instead of immediately returning an answer, **a result is sent every time an event happens on the server** after the client subscribes to it. Even though they are less common than _queries_ and _mutations_, they can be used to be notified in real time of a change in server-side data, such as the arrival of a new message in a chat application.
```

> If we go back to our example, we could add a _subscription_ in a `MediasCounter` graphic component that would subscribe to the event of adding a book and then increment a counter. Here’s what would happen schematically:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we go back to our example, we can add a _subscription_ in a `MediasCounter` graphic component that would subscribe to the event of adding a book and then increment a counter. Here’s what would happen schematically:
```

![subscription_schema](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ippontech/blog-usa/master/images/2022/08/graphql.subscription_schema.png)

In the same manner as the definition of _queries_ and _mutations_, the _subscription_ must be declared in the schema via the `Subscription` type and the associate function must be defined in the _resolver_, into the `Subscription` object.

![subscription](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ippontech/blog-usa/master/images/2022/08/graphql.subscription.png)

> The notable difference between _queries/mutations_ and _subscriptions_ is the use of a _publish/subscribe_ tool (here, `PubSub` included in graphql-subscriptions library). This kind of tool allow you to subscribe to an event (`pubsub.asyncIterator(['NOM_EVENT'])`) and to publish an event (`pubsub.publish('NOM_EVENT', {mediaAdded: newBook})`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The notable difference between _queries/mutations_ and _subscriptions_ is the use of a _publish/subscribe_ tool (here, `PubSub` included in graphql-subscriptions library). This kind of tool allows you to subscribe to (`pubsub.asyncIterator(['NOM_EVENT'])`) and publish an event (`pubsub.publish('NOM_EVENT', {mediaAdded: newBook})`).
```

> Then, the publication of a `MEDIA_ADDED` event is added into the `addBook` mutation. A “notification” will be sent to all subscribers who will be able to respond, such as our `MediasCounter` component by incrementing a counter for the addition of books.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The publication of a `MEDIA_ADDED` event is added into the `addBook` mutation. A “notification” will be sent to all subscribers who will be able to respond, such as our `MediasCounter` component by incrementing a counter for the addition of books.
```

# Conclusion

This introduction to GraphQL has reached the end. I have tried to address the most important features through code examples to give a more concrete overview of how GraphQL works.

> To sum up, GraphQL optimizes requests between the client and the server by requiring exactly the fields that we need, **which allows us to reduce the size of the network frame, ideal in a mobile environment for example**. Another important point is the **aggregation of multiple datasources**, which is useful in an architecture with a multitude of microservices. Also, thanks to its introspection system, the client can **easily discover the API and understand its modus operandi with the auto-generating documentation**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To sum up, GraphQL optimizes requests between the client and server by requiring the exact fields needed. **This allows us to reduce the size of the network frame, which can be ideal in a mobile environment, for example**. Another important point is the **aggregation of multiple datasources**, which is useful in an architecture with a multitude of microservices. Finally, thanks to its introspection system, the client can **easily discover the API and understand its modus operandi with the auto-generating documentation**.
```

> Nevertheless, the learning curve is difficult due to the new concepts and the multiplicity of files, both on the client side and on the server side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The learning curve can certainly be difficult due to the new concepts and the multiplicity of files, both on the client side and on the server side.
```

> All in all, GraphQL is a good alternative/complement to REST and occupies a growing place in architectures that communicate with APIs. To go further, other points remain to be addressed, such as cache management, error management, schema stitching or the various tools to debug.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All in all, GraphQL is a solid alternative/complement to REST and occupies a growing place in architectures that communicate with APIs. Other points remain to be addressed, such as cache management, error management, schema stitching, or the various debugging tools
```
